feat: adds initial cut at reference/stacks (#536)
cloudposse/docs: content/reference/stacks.md

---
title: "Stacks"
icon: "fa fa-layer-group"
description: "Stacks are a way to express the complete infrastructure needed for an environment using a standard YAML configuration"
weight: 1
tags:
- yaml
- atmos
- configuration
- concept
---

# Background

Stacks are a central piece of SweetOps. They're a set of YAML files that follow a standard schema that enable a **fully declarative description of your various environments**. This empowers you with the ability to separate your infrastructure's environment configuration settings from the business logic behind it (provided via components).

SweetOps utilizes YAML configuration for stacks because it's an easy to work with format that is nicely portable across multiple tools. The stack yaml format is natively supported today via [atmos](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos), [the terraform-yaml-stack-config module](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-yaml-stack-config), and [Spacelift](https://spacelift.io) via [the terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation module](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation).

> # Conventions

Reviewer: - [ ] Component inheritance
- [ ] catalogs/ (reusable imports)

> # Conventions

Author: @osterman can you share an example of component inheritance? I'm confused what you mean by that. 

Didn't know we're moving forward with `stacks/catalogs/` -- Will update 👍

We have a number of important conventions around stacks that are worth noting.

## Stack Files

Stack files can be very numerous in large cloud environments (think many dozens to hundreds of stack files). To enable proper organization of stack files, SweetOps recommends the following:

* All stacks should be stored in a `stacks/` folder at the root of your infrastructure repository.

> * Global values you that you want to share across all stacks should go into a `stacks/globals.yaml` file

Reviewer: I want to start putting all imports in the catalog directory. 

```suggestion
* Global values that you want to share across all stacks should go into a `stacks/catalog/globals.yaml` file
```

>   * This file name is special in that it will not be treated as a stack by any SweetOps automation tooling.

Reviewer: I don't think the file is special. We shouldn't have any special files.

Reviewer: (historically, it was special before we implemented imports)

Author: Yeah, referring to as special due to this logic in Spacelift component: 

```
  config_filenames   = fileset("../../../stacks", "*.yaml")
  stack_config_files = [for f in local.config_filenames : f if(replace(f, "globals", "") == f)]
```

Now that we'll be putting those "should be imported only" files into `stacks/catalogs/` then this is no longer a good point. 

I will be sure to update the documentation to reflect that.

* Name individual environment stacks as `$env-$stage.yaml`
  * For example, `$env` could be `ue2` (for `us-east-2`) and `$stage` might be `prod` which would result in `stacks/ue2-prod.yaml`

> * When you have configuration that should be shared across `env`'s, you should use `gbl` as your `env` and then share that configuration using `import`.

Author: One thing I'm not understanding properly: Is there some reason that we utilize `gbl` for global files like `gbl-security.yaml`, but we utilize `globals` for other global config files like `uw2-globals.yaml` and `globals.yaml`? 

Shouldn't all "import only, don't apply" configuration files like these be using the same `globals` pattern so they can get filtered out by this code?:

```hcl
  config_filenames   = fileset("../../../stacks", "*.yaml")
  stack_config_files = [for f in local.config_filenames : f if(replace(f, "globals", "") == f)]
```

Reviewer: `gbl` is a convention that relates to "global" resources. E.g. in AWS Route53 and IAM are global and not regional, while an RDS database is regional.

The `globals` file relates to global imports, not a global region.

Author: Gotcha. My confusion here stem'd from the fact that I **thought** we `import`'d `glb-*` files from the root `stacks/` folder in at least one customer's infrastructure, but now I can't seem to find that... so nevermind. Must have misread something 👍

>   * For example, you have values you want to share across `ue2-stage.yaml` and `uw2-stage.yaml` so you create a `glb-stage.yaml` stack file and utilize `import` in both `ue2` and `uw2` stacks to pull in that configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * For example, you have values you want to share across `ue2-stage.yaml` and `uw2-stage.yaml` so you create a `catalog/glb-stage.yaml` stack file and utilize `import` in both `ue2` and `uw2` stacks to pull in that configuration.
```

## Terraform Workspace Names

`atmos` and accompanying terraform automation modules like [terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation) will automatically create terraform [workspaces](https://www.terraform.io/docs/language/state/workspaces.html) when managing components. These workspaces derive their names from the stack name and the component name in question following this pattern: `$env-$stage-$component`. The result is workspace names like `ue2-dev-eks` or `uw2-prod-mq-broker`.

<!--

> TODO: Do we want to define the folder structure of `stacks/` and subdirectories for catalogs here or elsewhere? I'm not fully spun up on that convention right now, so going to leave this as a todo item for discussion.

Author: Note question here.

## Folder Structure
-->

# Stack Schema

<!--

> TODO: Is the vault backend supported as of today?

Author: Note questions here.

Reviewer: We support anything you can put in a backend block.

TODO: Should we mention the `remote` backend considering the current state of the TFC automation module?

> TODO: Do we have a defined JSON schema document to share here for Stack validation?

Author: @dylanbannon if I'm not mistaken, you were working on this? Mind directing me to this json schema if it exists? I'd like provide it here for folks.

Reviewer: https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/blob/master/docs/schema/stack-config-schema.json

Author: Good stuff I will add this 👍

-->

```yaml
# stacks/ue2-dev.yaml

# Imports enables shared configuration / settings across different stacks
# The referenced files are deep merged into this stack to support granular configuration capabilities
imports:
  # Merge the below `stacks/*.yaml` files into this stack to provide any shared `vars` or `components.*` configuration

>   - globals
>   - ue2-globals.yaml
>   - gbl-dev.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - catalog/globals
  - catalog/ue2-globals.yaml
  - catalog/gbl-dev.yaml
```

  environment: ue2

# Define cross-cutting terraform configuration
terraform:
  # `terraform.vars` provides shared configuration for terraform components
  vars: {}

  # `backend_type` + `backend` provide configuration for the terraform backend you
  # would like to use for all components. This is typically defined in `globals.yaml`
  backend_type: s3 # s3, remote, vault
  backend:
    s3:
      encrypt: true
      bucket: "eg-uw2-root-tfstate"
      key: "terraform.tfstate"
      dynamodb_table: "eg-uw2-root-tfstate-lock"
      role_arn: "arn:aws:iam::999999999999:role/eg-gbl-root-terraform"
      acl: "bucket-owner-full-control"
      region: "us-east-2"
    remote: {}
    vault: {}

# Define cross-cutting helmfile configuration
helmfile:
  # `helmfile.vars` provides shared configuration for terraform components
  vars:
    account_number: "999999999999"

# Components are all the top-level units that make up this stack
components:

  # All terraform components should be listed under this section.
  terraform:

    # List one or more Terraform components here
    first-component:
      # Provide automation settings for this component

>       settings:

Author: Do we use `settings` for anything other than spacelift right now?

Reviewer: It will also be used for `atmos` settings, but I'm not yet sure what the atmos ones are. We'll also add `vendir` settings.

Author: Got it. I'll leave those off for now since they are not actual, but good to know.

          - example1
          - example2

        map_var:
          key1: value1
          key2: value2

    # Every terraform component should be uniquely named and correspond to a folder in the `components/terraform/` directory
    second-component:
      vars:
        my_input_var: "Hello world! This is another example!"

    # You can also define component inheritance in stacks to enable unique workspace names or multiple usages of the same component in one stack.
    # In this example, `another-second-component` inherits from the base `second-component` component and overrides the `my_input_var` variable.
    another-second-component:
      component: second-component
      vars:
        my_input_var: "Hello world! This is an override."

  # All helmfile components should be listed under this section.
  helmfile:

    # Helmfile components should be uniquely named and correspond to a folder in the `components/helmfile/` directory
    # Helmfile components also support virtual components
    alb-controller:

      # Set the helmfile input variable values for this component.
      vars:
        installed: true
        chart_values:
          enableCertManager: true

> # `workflows` enable the ability to define an ordered operation for `atmos` to accomplish

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# `workflows` enable the ability to define an ordered list of operations that `atmos` will execute. These operations can be any type of component such as terraform or helmfile.
```

SweetOps utilizes YAML configuration for stacks because it's an easy to work with format that is nicely portable across multiple tools. The stack yaml format is natively supported today via [atmos](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos), [the terraform-yaml-stack-config module](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-yaml-stack-config), and [Spacelift](https://spacelift.io) via [the terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation module](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation).

# Conventions

We have a number of important conventions around stacks that are worth noting.

## Stack Files

Stack files can be very numerous in large cloud environments (think many dozens to hundreds of stack files). To enable proper organization of stack files, SweetOps recommends the following:

* All stacks should be stored in a `stacks/` folder at the root of your infrastructure repository.
* Name individual environment stacks following the pattern of `$environment-$stage.yaml`
  * For example, `$environment` might be `ue2` (for `us-east-2`) and `$stage` might be `prod` which would result in `stacks/ue2-prod.yaml`

> * For any **global** resources, such as Account Settings, IAM roles and policies, DNS records, or similar, the `environment` for the stack should be `gbl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For any **global** resources (as opposed to _regional_ resources), such as Account Settings, IAM roles and policies, DNS zones, or similar, the `environment` for the stack should be `gbl` to connote that it's not tied to any region.
```

  * For example, to deploy the `iam-delegated-roles` component (where all resources are global and not associated with an AWS region) to your production account, you should utilize a `stacks/gbl-prod.yaml` stack file.

> ## Shared Stack Configuration

Author: @osterman @aknysh @Nuru Could use eyes on this section in particular as I may be coming up with terms / conventions that already exist or disagree with how ya'll are doing things.  Also, see below section for my interpretation of the component inheritance functionality.

```yaml
# stacks/catalogs/s3-globals.yaml
components:
  terraform:
    s3-bucket:
      vars:
        enabled: false
        user_enabled: false
        acl: private
        grants: null
        versioning_enabled: true
```

```yaml
# stacks/uw2-dev.yaml
imports:
  - catalogs/s3-globals
  - catalogs/dev-globals
  - catalogs/uw2-globals

components:
  terraform:
    public-images:
      component: s3-bucket
      vars:
        enabled: true
        acl: public
        name: public-images

    export-data:
      component: s3-bucket
      vars:
        enabled: true
        name: export-data

    # ...
```

In the above, we're able to utilize the default settings provided via the `s3-bucket` base component catalog, while also creating multiple instances of the same component and providing our own overrides. This enables maximum reuse of global component configuration.

## Terraform Workspace Names

> `atmos` and accompanying terraform automation modules like [terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation) will automatically create terraform [workspaces](https://www.terraform.io/docs/language/state/workspaces.html) when managing components. These workspaces derive their names from the stack name and the component name in question following this pattern: `$env-$stage-$component`. The result is workspace names like `ue2-dev-eks` or `uw2-prod-mq-broker`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `atmos` and the accompanying terraform automation modules like [terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation) the terraform [workspaces](https://www.terraform.io/docs/language/state/workspaces.html) will be automatically created when managing components. These workspaces derive their names from the stack name and the component name in question following this pattern: `$env-$stage-$component`. The result is workspace names like `ue2-dev-eks` or `uw2-prod-mq-broker`.
```

Reviewer: (I prefer we don't start sentences with a code block)

# Conventions

We have a number of important conventions around stacks that are worth noting.

## Stack Files

Stack files can be very numerous in large cloud environments (think many dozens to hundreds of stack files). To enable proper organization of stack files, SweetOps recommends the following:

* All stacks should be stored in a `stacks/` folder at the root of your infrastructure repository.
* Name individual environment stacks following the pattern of `$environment-$stage.yaml`
  * For example, `$environment` might be `ue2` (for `us-east-2`) and `$stage` might be `prod` which would result in `stacks/ue2-prod.yaml`
* For any **global** resources, such as Account Settings, IAM roles and policies, DNS records, or similar, the `environment` for the stack should be `gbl`.
  * For example, to deploy the `iam-delegated-roles` component (where all resources are global and not associated with an AWS region) to your production account, you should utilize a `stacks/gbl-prod.yaml` stack file.

## Shared Stack Configuration

When you have configuration that you want to share across various stacks, use catalogs. Catalogs are the SweetOps term for shared, reusable configuration.

> By convention, all shared configuration for stacks is put in the `stacks/catalogs/` folder, which can then be used in the root `stacks/` stack files via `import`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By convention, all shared configuration for stacks is put in the `stacks/catalog/` folder, which can then be used in the root `stacks/` stack files via `import`. These files use the same stack schema. 
```

> There are a few types of shared configuration which are worth noting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few suggested shared configurations that we recommend adopting:
```

* **Global Catalogs**: For any configuration to share across **all** stacks.

>   * For example, you create a `stacks/catalogs/globals.yaml` file and utilize `import` wherever you need that catalog.

Reviewer: It appears we (cloudposse) are inconsistent with calling directory `catalogs` or `catalog`, but I looked at a few of our modules, and it appears we use `catalog`. Also, it makes sense since we have a single catalog with lots of configurations.

Author: Good catch 👍

  * For example, to share configuration across `ue2-stage.yaml` and `uw2-stage.yaml` stacks, you create a `stacks/catalogs/stage-globals.yaml` file and utilize `import` in both the `ue2-stage.yaml` and `uw2-stage.yaml` stacks to pull in that catalog.
* **Stage Catalogs**: For any configuration that you want to share across `stage` boundaries.
  * For example, to share configuration across `ue2-dev.yaml`, `ue2-stage.yaml`, and `ue2-prod.yaml` stacks, you create a `stacks/catalogs/ue2-globals.yaml` file and `import` that catalog in the respective `dev`, `stage`, and `prod` stacks.
* **Base Components**: For any configuration that you want to share across all instances of a component.
  * For example, you're using the `eks` component and you want to ensure all of you EKS clusters are using the same Kubernetes version, you create a `stacks/catalogs/eks-globals.yaml` file which specifies the `eks` component's `vars.kubernetes_version`. You can then `import` that base component configuration in any stack file that uses the `eks` component.
  * More information in the below section.

## Component Inheritance

> Using component catalogs, you can define default values for all instances of a component across your stacks. But it is also important to note that you can provide default values for multiple instances of a component in a single stack using the component inheritance pattern via the `component` key / value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a component catalog, you can define the default values for all instances of a component across your stacks. But it is also important to note that you can provide default values for multiple instances of a component in a single stack using the component inheritance pattern via the `component` key / value:
```

```yaml

> # stacks/catalogs/s3-globals.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# stacks/catalog/component/s3-bucket.yaml
```

components:
  terraform:
    s3-bucket:
      vars:
        enabled: false
        user_enabled: false
        acl: private
        grants: null
        versioning_enabled: true
```

```yaml
# stacks/uw2-dev.yaml

> imports:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import:
```

>   - catalogs/s3-globals
>   - catalogs/dev-globals
>   - catalogs/uw2-globals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - catalog/component/s3-bucket
  - catalog/dev/globals
  - catalog/uw2/globals
```

Author: @osterman Aha interesting. I was already doing a bit of pattern design from some not-so-defined / scattered patterns I was seeing in some of the client repos and it seems you're doubling down on that here. I like it! Once this PR merges, let's be sure to let the full team know about this document and hold people to these patterns!

Reviewer: Yes, I'm making an executive decision here that I want to use the `catalog/` pattern for imports with stacks.

components:
  terraform:
    public-images:
      component: s3-bucket
      vars:
        enabled: true
        acl: public
        name: public-images

    export-data:
      component: s3-bucket
      vars:
        enabled: true
        name: export-data

    # ...
```

> In the above, we're able to utilize the default settings provided via the `s3-bucket` base component catalog, while also creating multiple instances of the same component and providing our own overrides. This enables maximum reuse of global component configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, we're able to utilize the default settings provided via the `s3-bucket` base component catalog, while also creating multiple instances of the same component and providing our own overrides. This enables maximum reuse of global component configuration.
```

## Terraform Workspace Names

`atmos` and accompanying terraform automation modules like [terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation](https://github.com/cloudposse/terraform-spacelift-cloud-infrastructure-automation) will automatically create terraform [workspaces](https://www.terraform.io/docs/language/state/workspaces.html) when managing components. These workspaces derive their names from the stack name and the component name in question following this pattern: `$env-$stage-$component`. The result is workspace names like `ue2-dev-eks` or `uw2-prod-mq-broker`.

# Stack Schema

<!--
TODO: Is the vault backend supported as of today?
TODO: Should we mention the `remote` backend considering the current state of the TFC automation module?
-->

[The official JSON Schema document for Stacks can be found here](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/blob/master/docs/schema/stack-config-schema.json). The below is a walk through of a complete example utilizing all capabilities.

```yaml
# stacks/ue2-dev.yaml
s3-bucket:

>       vars:

Reviewer: whitespace

Reviewer: structure wrong

Author: Will fix.

Author: Fixed. Removed this completely since I believe it was a bad copy / pasta.

        enabled: false
        user_enabled: false
        acl: "private"
        grants: null
        policy: ""
        force_destroy: false
        versioning_enabled: true
        allow_encrypted_uploads_only: false
        lifecycle_rule_enabled: false
        noncurrent_version_glacier_transition_days: 30
        noncurrent_version_deeparchive_transition_days: 60
        noncurrent_version_expiration_days: 90
        standard_transition_days: 30
        glacier_transition_days: 60
        deeparchive_transition_days: 90
        enable_glacier_transition: false
        enable_deeparchive_transition: false
        enable_standard_ia_transition: false
        enable_current_object_expiration: false
        expiration_days: 90
        lifecycle_tags: {}
        block_public_acls: true
        block_public_policy: true
        ignore_public_acls: true
        restrict_public_buckets: true

# Imports enables shared configuration / settings across different stacks
# The referenced files are deep merged into this stack to support granular configuration capabilities

> imports:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import:
```

  # Merge the below `stacks/catalog/*.yaml` files into this stack to provide any shared `vars` or `components.*` configuration
  - catalog/globals
  - catalog/ue2-globals
  - catalog/dev-globals

# `vars` provides shared configuration for all components -- both terraform + helmfile
vars:
  # Used to determine the name of the workspace (e.g. the 'dev' in 'ue2-dev')
  stage: dev
  # Used to determine the name of the workspace (e.g. the 'ue2' in 'ue2-dev')
  environment: ue2

# Define cross-cutting terraform configuration
terraform:
  # `terraform.vars` provides shared configuration for terraform components
  vars: {}

  # `backend_type` + `backend` provide configuration for the terraform backend you
  # would like to use for all components. This is typically defined in `globals.yaml`
  backend_type: s3 # s3, remote, vault
  backend:
    s3:
      encrypt: true
      bucket: "eg-uw2-root-tfstate"
      key: "terraform.tfstate"
      dynamodb_table: "eg-uw2-root-tfstate-lock"
      role_arn: "arn:aws:iam::999999999999:role/eg-gbl-root-terraform"
      acl: "bucket-owner-full-control"
      region: "us-east-2"
    remote: {}

>     vault: {}

Reviewer: This is showing how multiple backends can be configured, of which one is enabled with `backend_type`

Author: Will mention 👍
